How Does Coronavirus (COVID-19) Spread?
People can catch coronavirus from others who have the virus. This happens when an infected person sneezes or coughs, sending tiny droplets into the air. These can land in the nose, mouth, or eyes of someone nearby, or be breathed in. People also can get infected if they touch an infected droplet on a surface and then touch their own nose, mouth, or eyes. Experts are looking at whether the virus can spread through stool (poop).

Can Someone Who's Infected Spread Coronavirus (COVID-19) if They Don't Have Symptoms?
The virus spreads most easily when an infected person has symptoms. But some spread might be possible before symptoms start. It can take 2–14 days after someone is exposed to the virus for symptoms to show up.

Is My Child at Risk for Coronavirus (COVID-19)?
Experts are still learning about coronavirus, but it seems to cause a milder illness in children than in adults or older people. Most people who have died from coronavirus were older adults or people with health problems, such as heart disease, lung disease, or diabetes.

Can Someone Get Coronavirus (COVID-19) From Packaged Foods or Animal Products From Areas Where People Are Infected?
It doesn't appear that coronavirus can spread through packaged foods or animal products. It's still important to use good food safety practices, such as handling raw meat with care and not eating raw or undercooked animal products.

Can Someone Get Coronavirus (COVID-19) From a Package Sent From Areas Where People Are Infected?
There's no evidence that someone can be infected through a package. The risk is very low because the packages are shipped over a period of days or weeks and it's not likely that the virus would survive.

Can Pets Get Coronavirus (COVID-19)?
Experts don't know if cats, dogs, and other pets can catch the virus. Just to be safe, people who are sick shouldn't have contact with their pets. If someone must care for a pet while sick, they should wash their hands before and after contact and wear a face mask.

Who Should Wear a Face Mask?
You should wear a face mask if: You are taking care of someone who is (or might be) infected with coronavirus. You are coughing or sneezing. You have coronavirus or have been tested for coronavirus. You are a health care provider.

What Should I Do if a Family Member Has Symptoms of Coronavirus (COVID-19)?
The symptoms of coronavirus (fever, cough, and trouble breathing) can look a lot like illnesses from other viruses. If a family member has trouble breathing, go to the emergency room or call an ambulance right away. Call your doctor if someone in your family has a fever, cough, or other flu-like symptoms. If this person has been near someone with coronavirus or lived in or traveled to an area where lots of people have coronavirus, tell the doctor. The doctor can decide whether your family member can be treated at home, should come in for a visit, can have a telehealth visit, and/or needs to be tested for coronavirus.

How Do Doctors Test People for Coronavirus (COVID-19)?
To test someone for coronavirus, doctors send a mucus sample from the nose and back of the throat to a lab. If the person coughs up mucus, doctors might send that for testing too.

How Can We Protect Ourselves From Coronavirus (COVID-19)?
As with other viruses, the best ways to protect yourself and your family are: Avoid people who are sick. Try to stay at least 6 feet (2 meters) away from someone who is coughing or sneezing. Wash your hands well and often. Wash for at least 20 seconds with soap and water or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol. Teach your kids to do the same. Try not to touch your eyes, nose, and mouth. Use a household cleaner or wipe to clean surfaces and objects that people touch a lot. Follow national and local recommendations for activities such as meetings, going out, and going to the gym.

How Is Coronavirus (COVID-19) Treated?
Currently, there's no medicine or vaccine for coronavirus. Most people with the illness, including children, get better with rest and fluids. People who are very ill get care in a hospital with breathing help, IV fluids, and other treatments. Antibiotics can't treat viruses so they won't help with the coronavirus. Medicines for the flu don't work either because the coronavirus is different from the flu virus. Doctors and scientists are working to create a treatment and vaccine for coronavirus, but this will take time.

Should We Cancel Our Travel Plans Due to Coronavirus (COVID-19)?
Recommendations for travel are changing every day. Check the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) website for the latest updates.

What Is the Future of Coronavirus (COVID-19)?
Experts aren't sure what will happen. Some things that may influence what happens with coronavirus include: how effective areas are at controlling its spread how long it takes to develop medicines to treat coronavirus how long it takes to develop a COVID-19 vaccine.

Are people with CF at increased risk for COVID-19 infection?
Evidence has shown that people with underlying health conditions, including lung disease, seem to be at greater risk of serious illness from COVID-19. The CDC has issued guidelines for people who are at higher risk. Stay at home as much as possible to further reduce your risk of being exposed. Stock up on supplies. Take everyday precautions to keep space between yourself and others. When you go out in public, keep away from others who are sick, limit close contact, and wash your hands often. Avoid crowds. Avoid cruise travel and non-essential air travel. Recognizing that CF is a complex disease and affects each person living with it differently, we recommend you speak with your care team directly with specific questions about your personal health and risk factors, and continue to check the CDC website for complete guidelines and the most up-to-date information.

What precautions should people with CF be taking related to COVID-19? Is there anything I can do beyond handwashing to protect myself/my family?
People with CF and those close to them should continue taking precautions to keep themselves healthy and follow the CDC's guidance for those at-higher risk. 

Is it safe for me/my loved one with CF to go to work or school?
These are unique times and require some rethinking of strategies.
We strongly recommend that children with CF stay home from school. Distance learning or other remote options should be considered in all cases. We strongly recommend that adults with CF work remotely whenever possible. We recognize that every individual's circumstances are unique. Questions about your personal risk factors should be directed to your care team, who can help you determine if you should take additional precautions.

My school/child's school is still in session. What can I do?
The CF Foundation has provided care teams with template letters to support distance learning or remote work. These letters are also available through COMPASS (844-COMPASS). We encourage you to reach out to your care team for their assistance with these requests and any other individual health needs. 

Is it safe for me/my loved one with CF to travel?
We strongly recommend people living with CF do not travel in the US or internationally at this time. The CDC recommends that people at increased risk for COVID-19 avoid traveling by airplane and on cruise ships.
Please refer to the CDC and Johns Hopkins maps for the latest information on affected areas.

Is it safe for me/my loved one to continue going to clinic visits?
People with CF should maintain their regular daily care regimens. Routine well-visits should be conducted by telehealth approaches or postponed whenever possible. Care teams have been asked to think creatively, such as phone check-ins, to avoid unnecessary risk of exposure and pressure on their staff and healthcare institutions.

Should I stockpile medicines or supplies?
The CDC recommends you have access to several weeks of medicines and supplies in case you need to stay home for prolonged periods of time.We are not currently aware of any CF medication shortages caused by COVID-19.
We are actively monitoring the Food and Drug Administration's list of medication and supply shortages and are in contact with the manufacturers of many widely used CF medicines.

Will wearing a mask prevent me from getting infected?
People with CF should continue to follow Cystic Fibrosis Foundation infection prevention and control guidelines, which recommend that people with CF wear a surgical mask in health care settings to reduce the risk of cross-infection from CF germs.
During the COVID-19 outbreak, the CDC recommends wearing a facemask if you are sick and you are around other people. The CDC states that you do not need to wear a mask if you are not sick unless you are caring for somebody who is sick and they can't wear a facemask. Properly fitted N95 masks could help prevent transmission of the COVID-19 virus and the CDC is currently recommending N95 masks for health workers. The CDC has also recommended that health workers can use surgical facemasks instead of N95 masks under certain circumstances at facilities that experience a shortage of N95 masks.

How do I get tested for COVID-19?
The CDC recommends that people who have symptoms of COVID-19 be tested. If you have symptoms of COVID-19 (fever, cough, shortness of breath), contact your doctor. Because the supply of testing kits is currently limited, many areas are only testing people who need to be hospitalized or health care workers who become sick. People who have not experienced symptoms but are worried about getting COVID-19 are unlikely to be tested at this time. Your doctor may recommend you be tested, and the CDC recommends doctors work with local and state health departments to coordinate testing through public health laboratories.

Am I at increased risk for COVID-19 because I had a transplant?
We are not aware of any specific information regarding COVID-19 among people who are post-transplant. Because they take medication that suppresses their immune systems to prevent organ rejection, people who have had a transplant should also be considered at greater risk of serious illness from COVID-19.
Talk to your transplant team about precautions you can take beyond what the CDC recommends.

This situation has caused a lot of anxiety in me and my family. What can I do?
Many people with CF are experiencing anxiety because of all the uncertainty around COVID-19, particularly because of the higher risk. The CDC provides information on coping with the fear and anxiety caused by the COVID-19 outbreak, and the CF Foundation has developed resources on anxiety and CF.

What should I do if I am currently participating in a clinical trial?
If you are participating in clinical research, please be in communication with the research team about your study visits. Many studies are making changes which will allow you to stay in the study while also making your safety the top priority.

Can people go outside during the COVID-19 outbreak?
Yes! In fact, we encourage people with CF to get fresh air by going for walks or exercising while staying at least six feet apart from others. We recommend avoiding playground equipment at this time. 

how long can this virus survive in various temperatures on a surface, say, a door handle or a counter at a public place?
it really depends on the amount of moisture and humidity and what happens on that surface afterwards, whether it’s wiped off or something. So potentially for longer than that, potentially up to a week. But with cleaning and disinfectants, etc, not very long.

what’s an envelope virus?
viruses are basically nucleic acid. So DNA like is in all of the cells in our body or RNA. And then they have a protein coat and then outside of that they have an envelope that’s made of lipids. So it’s just an outer layer of the virus. And if it’s made of lipids, you can imagine any kind of detergent like when you’re doing your dishes, disrupts all the lipids in the fat. That’s how you get all the grease off your plates. Right? So any detergent like that will disrupt the envelope of the virus and make it non-infective. So cleaning surfaces is a good way to try and eliminate an infective virus particle from, for example, door handles, surfaces, et cetera.

should people cancel travel plans given that this virus is already here? Does travelling make the spread worse? And that’s international travel or domestic travel.
Australia’s been very strategic in banning travel to certain places. And of course, those places you would not want to travel to at the time when there’s an outbreak like China, Italy, Iran, etc.. I was also asked the question on ABC Tasmania: should the Tasmanians restrict domestic travel to Tasmania? At the time, they had a single case. And I said to them, if you have one case, you most likely have more. You will not prevent the entry of the virus into Tasmania. But what restricting travel can do is restrict the number of people who are seeding that area with virus and make it more manageable. So it’s a question of timing. As I was saying to you earlier, the cost-benefit of closing off travel has to be weighed very carefully because the economic impacts are very great. So I think it’s a case by case basis. Ultimately, the planet is now seeded. And we’re moving into the stage of exponential growth and that it will affect travel very severely, where in all likelihood, travel will be very much curtailed now.

with the flu killing more people each year than coronavirus and mostly the same demographic, why is this outbreak receiving so much attention? Can’t we just catch the flu just as easily without cancelling events and travel plans?
Flu exists. We get it seasonally every year and then we get pandemic flu. And yes, people do die from influenza. I think it was 16,000 people in the US died last US winter. But the issue with this virus is that we don’t yet know how to treat it particularly well. We’re trialling anti-viral drugs in China at the very moment. There’s clinical trials on experimental drugs. There’s drugs that doctors are using. But until that data comes in and we actually know what regime of anti-viral drugs (are best) to use, then we don’t really yet know how to treat it with anti-viral drugs. The other thing is with flu, we have a vaccine. People can take the vaccine. Somebody gets sick in their family, the other family members can take the vaccine and prevent the spread of the virus. So the difference is with flu, we have ways to control it. We know about the disease. We know how it presents. This virus, we’re still understanding the clinical presentation and in different cohorts. So different age groups, different countries, different situations, we’re still understanding the symptoms. And we don’t yet fully know how to control it by antivirals. And we don’t have a vaccine yet. I think one of the reasons we’re being so careful is when it broke and Wuhan, at the beginning the mortality rate was extremely high. And with related viruses like SARS, and MERS that went as high as 35%, whereas flu mortality rates is usually around 0.1%. So it was that very high mortality rate that gave a real shock. Had it continued, it would have been devastating. We’re very fortunate that now we see it dropping down to the 2 to 3% level and some say much lower.

how far off is a vaccine?
vaccines in Australia. The group in Melbourne was the first to be able to isolate and grow the virus. And I’ve been in touch with them, in fact, this morning. We’re working collaboratively nationally as well as internationally, collaborating with people at Stanford Medical School who through Stanford, in collaborations we have with them, we have worldwide about 15 vaccine projects going, plus all sorts of industry companies are aiming to make vaccines. In fact, one company in Israel early on announced that they believe that they can get to a vaccine within a few weeks. The problem with the vaccine is you may produce it even quickly, but it’s testing it and making sure that it’s actually going to help. There’s a fear, with COVID-19, that if it is not formulated correctly, to make a long story short, it can actually exacerbate the disease. So everyone has to take it slowly and carefully so that we don’t actually cause more problems than we currently have. But I’m optimistic and believe that we’ll get there. The WHO declared it would take 18 months. I would like to present a more optimistic view, not based on anything that substantial, but I think we can do better than that. And it is a great learning curve for the next time this happens.
Recently, we’ve just seen Africa experience a very significant outbreak of Ebola virus, and there’s been an experimental vaccine that’s been administered that has largely controlled that outbreak. I think the people working in vaccines and the people who do the safety and efficacy studies, we’ve learnt a lot from how to administer vaccines, how to get the data we need to show safety more quickly than we might have in the past. So in the sense we’ve learnt, we’re learning lessons constantly from viral outbreaks. It might not be the same virus, might not be the same country, even the same continent. But we’re learning how to do these things more efficiently and more quickly. And always the issue is weighing up safety versus the ethics of the need to administer all get it, get the drug out there as quickly as possible.

isn’t lining up at fever clinics for tests just going to spread it even more?
the way in which people are processed at clinics is crucial and the minimal distance you should keep from a person who’s infected is, according again to the WHO, is one metre. So the clinics have to ensure that spread is minimised, not only spread between people waiting in line, but to the health workers themselves. We’ve had real problems for health workers in China. Several died. And we face that problem here. One of the things we have to do is ensure that we protect our health workers because otherwise they’re not going to want to go in and actually see the patients. Unfortunately, masks alone do not work. We can’t rely on them. So it’s a problem. In Israel, for example, testing for COVID-19, takes place in one’s home. An ambulance pulls up and takes the swab and then takes it to the lab. That actually would be the ideal approach. True, the ambulance services in Israel now are swamped and having great difficulty in coping. But as much as we can keep people separated from each other when they’re infected, it’s crucial for the success of any campaign.

How likely is it that we can catch the virus and is hand-washing really the only thing we can be doing to protect ourselves?
I think we now know that the virus is definitely in Australia. If you go to the New South Wales or Victorian Health government websites, you can see them update the statistics daily, even less than a day so that the truth is it’s here and it’s probably in more people than we realise because we haven’t tested as many people and we now realise some people are asymptomatic or don’t show classic flu like symptoms. So it’s here and you can’t say that you’re not going to get sick. Alright? That’s the first thing to say. The second thing is, though, we can minimise what we do. Okay. So we can wash our hands constantly. We can try not to touch our face, our eyes, our ears, our nose. We’ve learned, for example, even how do you dispose of a tissue when you sneeze or cough or, you know, sneeze into your elbow? So it’s just about common sense. This is what I think. It’s no different really than protecting yourself from any respiratory virus infection. So seasonal flu or even a pandemic flu.

And how do you dispose of a tissue safely?
you fold it in and then you put - you don’t touch it, you don’t put it up your sleeve, OK? - you put it in the garbage bin and wash your hands afterwards.

what can we learn from other countries that are handling this well?
So the country that handled this outbreak the best so far has been Taiwan. The Taiwanese have been amazing in the sense that after the pandemic commenced in China, many Taiwanese returned to Taiwan. And you would have expected they’d seed that island very strongly and it would be a major outbreak. They were ready before the pandemic commenced. And that was largely because they went through a SARS outbreak. Previously, they had in place all the testing, all the people. They have the best health system in the world. And they kept the numbers down to 45 cases during a period when in China it was going into the tens of thousands. And they should be commended on that. It’s quite amazing the way they did that. The issue now in Taiwan, which concerns them, is in the end, that’s a great start. But their population now is unexposed and susceptible. So how do you release them from this sort of quarantine situation? That is the next phase. And that’s what we’re looking to see how that works, because same in Wuhan. The minute you put everyone back out to work and in the street, will there be a second wave? Most virologists, I think, would expect there will be a major second wave, third wave and maybe continued into the future. So we have to continue with our preparedness and with the hope that the vaccine will come into effect sooner rather than later. And then bringing the quarantine approach, enabling that peak of viral infection to occur when the vaccine is available. That would be the goal.

when do we stop testing for this disease and basically just assume that everybody with the sniffles has it?
first of all, the major symptoms are not sniffles, they are fever and coughing and shortness of breath. It’s the sniffles, though, that causes it to be spreadable more easily. That’s a good question: what the health authorities will decide to do at various stages of this pandemic. We’re now at what I would consider the early seeding phase. The world is now seeded with virus and different countries were going through exponential phases like described in Wuhan at different times. And how do they handle that will be a crucial question. I’ve seen all the different approaches from US, Israel, Iran. I think that a mixture of very strategic quarantine with travel restrictions, with bringing in other types of… certainly health authorities will need to control the number of beds that are being occupied. For example, again, in Israel, they just went over their bed limits, so patients are starting to be treated at home. So at some point, I think depending on how the epidemic goes, if we can keep it under control, we can keep the testing going. We can keep control. If the exponential rise is too fast, we will lose control and the testing will become meaningless. So the hope is that things will be sorted and I think Australia has the opportunity to do really well and big decisions have to be made now.There’s already a paper just this week published in The Lancet that profiles survivors versus those who have succumbed from the infection. And we’re starting to learn what some of those factors are. So as as clinicians can better predict who are likely to be the more seriously ill people, they can better predict who should go to hospital for treatment,

how does this virus respond to cold or warm temperatures? Is it like the flu, which thrives in cold weather?
What we know is when this high humidity viruses can exist for longer because they don’t dry out. So that envelope we talked about is less likely to be dried out. And once that’s dried out, the virus is less infective. It’s not actually infective at all if it’s disrupted that envelope. But whether it likes cold temperatures, high temperatures, we think it’s not a warm temperature virus. We think it’s more a cold temperature virus. China’s just been going through their winter. Maybe one of the reasons it’s been big in Italy is they’ve just had winter. We also think the coexistence of seasonal flu in Italy at the same time is probably one of the factors that’s made it more severe. So, yeah, look, different circumstances in different countries, different climates. It’s not just about climate, though. It’s about susceptibility of various populations. Therefore, it’s a hard question to answer (at the moment). working in infectious diseases for many years, it’s a very difficult thing to predict. Remember with, it doesn’t matter which disease I was working on, everyone said it can’t transmit in dry climates. And it transmitted beautifully in the desert. And you think everything’s totally dry and it still transmits and vice versa.

once you’ve recovered from coronavirus, can you just go back to your normal, non-isolating life?
if you go through one infection, you’re probably rendered immune against re-infection. There have been reports of cases of people getting re-infected. But the opinion that I heard so far is that it’s probably recurrence of the same infection that probably went down in terms of clinical symptoms. But the virus remained that just came back up. It happens with the flu all the time. The question is, what should be your behaviour after you go through a bout? I guess I would still be careful, it could be that the virus will continue to mutate. Although again, I fortunately heard this morning that they’re not that worried about this virus mutating at the rate that flu does. And we’re hopeful that we will develop herd immunity. People have gone through it then will be fairly safe unless, you have some immune disorder. And then it will become part of our environment just like flu is.

It seems like there’s two camps. There’s the people who genuinely really concerned, quite worried about the situation. We see that in the panic buying. And then there’s the other camp of people who are saying it’s all been blown up. It’s all hype. We don’t really need to worry about it. It’s too early to panic. And I just wondered, how do you reconcile those two views out there in the community?
We all have to accept the fact that this is part of nature. These viruses are out there all the time. We know them. I can detect now flu viruses in wildlife, birds that are coming into this country now, that can mutate and start affecting humans. So we have to be prepared. We have to face up to them, together in a collaborative way, in a scientific and professional way. And we could win. If we panic and react the way the market is, for example, of course, that’s that’s an improper way to react. Rather, this is part of being, of our biology. Viruses exist that can hurt us and they will always exist.

are the death rates likely to be lower in a country like Australia with lower rates of smoking than places such as China, Iran and Indonesia?
It’s very hard to predict these things. It was intriguing that some of the highest death rates in China appeared to be men as well as just the elderly. And that might be because there’s a high rate of long term smoking. So almost like an endemic lung pathology within that community that somehow exacerbated the disease. In Australia, we may find that there are different populations that are the most at risk. So we know, for example, the virus uses a receptor to get inside of cells that is a protein present on cardiac tissue. So people with known cardiac conditions may turn out to be at higher risk. And in a non-smoking type country, maybe people with existing heart conditions will turn out to be the most at risk. In America, we might find something quite different. What we might find is it’s more socio-economic. Maybe people without health insurance. Maybe people who are homeless and live on the streets will turn out to be the most affected because they have limited resources to be able to get treatment and they can’t afford treatment. So I think each country will be different. We mentioned earlier Italy has one of the highest fatality rates at the moment. That may be because they actually have a large number of people within their population that are over 65. So it might actually be not that surprising given that demographic. It might also be that they’ve had an outbreak of seasonal flu at the same time. We don’t know whether one type of virus limits the other. It’s quite possible you can get co-infections and that’s where people get the most sick. I think it’s going to pan out in different countries slightly differently. I think it’s a case of watch this space.

if I could shrink myself down to microscopic size and watch a virus invade a cell, what would I see?
a virus is not like a bacteria. A bacteria is a entity all of its own, and it can replicate and make another copy of itself and grow on a nutrient source. A virus, however, is sometimes called a non-living entity because outside of a human cell, it can’t replicate. It just exists as an entity. A virus is essentially just a piece of DNA, which is, you know, in the nucleus of every cell. It’s what our chromosomes are made of. So it’s either DNA or RNA surrounded by a protein coat and sometimes it’s also a lipid-based envelope outside of that, again. The virus will somehow encounter a cell. And for respiratory viruses, it’s largely by us inhaling water vapour droplets. They may contain hundreds of viruses. Those viruses then will attach or be exposed to our respiratory epithelium. If the virus can actually bind to the respiratory epithelium cell, then it might get inside. Once inside, it may or may not have the capacity to actually undergo replication, but it has to uncoat from that protein shell. Then the nucleic acid, the DNA or RNA has to make another copy of itself. Then all the genes that are in the virus have to get expressed as proteins. They then reassemble into a new viral particle and then the virus will get out of the cell. Sometimes it lyses (breaks) the cell, sometimes it will just buds out from the cell and leave the cell intact. And that’s what a virus is. That’s why we, some people call them living or non-living because they can only replicate in inside a cell, a host cell.

I heard on the radio today that half the population is likely to get this. And with, say, a 1% death rate, the body count will add up. And I wondered what you thought of that?
So there was an announcement actually by Angela Merkel preparing Germany for 70% of the population being infected. Lisa may say the number is lower, I don’t know, until we build up herd immunity. The question of the mortality rate, as I alluded to before, I think based on what again, CDC and WHO are writing, is probably overestimated. Some estimate the mortality rate as being much lower. That’s not to say… every death is a family and has to be looked at and be concerned about. So again, I think and would like to hope that as we develop new vaccines, as we develop drugs, as we develop approaches to quarantine people, test them, keep them at home, isolate them, we’ll get the mortality rate under control. And I’m going to express an optimistic view. This world has amazing capabilities of doing amazing science. And if we apply it and work together, I think we can control this problem.

what is the likelihood of transmission through using a public swimming pool?
quite small because a) the virus would be quite diluted in a swimming pool. Secondly, swimming pools are all treated with chlorine, for example, and chlorine is a very effective anti-viral agent. You’d have to drink a lot of swimming pool water to get the virus.

there are conflicting symptoms lists circulating on Facebook. One says it starts with a dry cough and if your nose is running, it is not COVID-19, which I suspect is incorrect. Can we please have an accurate list?
 the cough and shortness of breath and fever. But, it’s not to say it’s not possible that you’ll have also upper respiratory effects. The virus goes into the lung and attaches to the alveolar cells or to the cells that make up our air sacs and that help our breathing. And it has to get there to really cause this disease. So if there’s upper respiratory involvement, which includes sneezing and runny nose, et cetera, it’s probably not the main effect of the virus. Again, I would say if you see that somebody is sneezing and wheezing and and that’s it, it’s probably an allergy, but it does frighten people. I was on the train this morning, and I know if I, God forbid, sneezed the whole train would empty out pretty quickly.
 
can you catch it twice?
no, because we imagine that there’s a good immune response that will then provide you protection from re-infection. That’s what our immune system does. But this is a new virus. We don’t yet fully understand how our immune system clears it. We don’t know whether virus can remain for a longer period of time. I would would say, though, that there are only a few cases of people who have been treated, appear to have recovered, they’ve gone home, they’ve then had another relapse. There’s only a very few number of cases that have been like that. So for all intents and purposes, I don’t think that’s something we should fear and it’s not something we’ve seen with the previous SARS outbreak in 2003.
 
 How will quarantine work in a family?
We think of quarantine as being away from work or away from public places. But really, if you have been infected, then the people in your family are as at risk as your work colleagues would be at work. Again, I think it’s about just common sense. Don’t share food utensils, wash your hands, don’t keep touching your face and your mouth and your nose. Get rid of tissues in a nice sort of clean manner. It’s about minimising transmission.
 
What is novel coronavirus?
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified. The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold. A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis. Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
 
Why is the disease being called coronavirus disease 2019, COVID-19?
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China. The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19. In COVID-19, ‘CO’ stands for ‘corona,’ ‘VI’ for ‘virus,’ and ‘D’ for disease. Formerly, this disease was referred to as “2019 novel coronavirus” or “2019-nCoV”. There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses. COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans. The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.

Why might someone blame or avoid individuals and groups (create stigma) because of COVID-19?
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading. Some people are worried about the disease. Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, towards Chinese or other Asian Americans or people who were in quarantine. Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation. Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger towards ordinary people instead of the disease that is causing the problem.

How can people help stop stigma related to COVID-19?
People can fight stigma and help, not hurt, others by providing social support. Counter stigma by learning and sharing facts. Communicating the facts that viruses do not target specific racial or ethnic groups and how COVID-19 actually spreads can help stop stigma.

What is the source of the virus?
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses. Some cause illness in people, and others, such as canine and feline coronaviruses, only infect animals. Rarely, animal coronaviruses that infect animals have emerged to infect people and can spread between people. This is suspected to have occurred for the virus that causes COVID-19. Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) are two other examples of coronaviruses that originated from animals and then spread to people. More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.

How does the virus spread?
This virus was first detected in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China. The first infections were linked to a live animal market, but the virus is now spreading from person-to-person. It’s important to note that person-to-person spread can happen on a continuum. Some viruses are highly contagious (like measles), while other viruses are less so.The virus that causes COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (“community spread”) in some affected geographic areas. Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected. Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.

Can someone who has had COVID-19 spread the illness to others?
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person. Someone who is actively sick with COVID-19 can spread the illness to others. That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others. How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made on a case-by-case basis in consultation with doctors, infection prevention and control experts, and public health officials and involves considering specifics of each situation including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Current CDC guidance for when it is OK to release someone from isolation is made on a case by case basis and includes meeting all of the following requirements: The patient is free from fever without the use of fever-reducing medications.
The patient is no longer showing symptoms, including cough. The patient has tested negative on at least two consecutive respiratory specimens collected at least 24 hours apart.Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.

Can someone who has been quarantined for COVID-19 spread the illness to others?
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease. Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure. For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure, because 14 days is the longest incubation period seen for similar coronaviruses. Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.

Can the virus that causes COVID-19 be spread through food, including refrigerated or frozen food?
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person-to-person through respiratory droplets. Currently there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food. Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds for general food safety. Throughout the day wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging that are shipped over a period of days or weeks at ambient, refrigerated, or frozen temperatures.Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.

Will warm weather stop the outbreak of COVID-19?
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature impact the spread of COVID-19. Some other viruses, like the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.  At this time, it is not known whether the spread of COVID-19 will decrease when weather becomes warmer.  There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.

What is communiw spread?
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including
some who are not sure how or where they became infected.

Am I at risk for COVID-19 in the United States?
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the may change daily. The latest updates are available on CDC's Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID.19) website.

Has anyone in the United States gotten infected?
Yes. There have been cases of COVID•19 in the U.S. related to travel and through close contact. U.S. case counts are updated regularly Mondays through Fridays. See the current U.S. case count of COVID.19

How can I help protect myself?
Visit the COVID. | 9 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory
illnesse* like COVID-19.

What should I do if I had close contact with someone who has COVID-19?
There is information for p.enle-yyhq-ha.ye-had-gl.me-on.taq with a person confirmed to have. or being evaluated
for. COVID-19 available online.

Who is at higher risk for serious illness from COVID-19?
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.  Based upon available information to date, those most at risk include People 65 years and older People who live in a nursing home or long-term care facility People of any age with the following underlying medical conditions, particularly those that are not well controlled Chronic lung disease or asthma
Congestive heart failure or coronary artery disease Diabetes Neurologic conditions that weaken ability to cough
Weakened immune system Chemotherapy or radiation for cancer (currently or in recent past) Sickle cell anemia Chronic kidney disease requiring dialysis Cirrhosis of the liver Lack of spleen or a spleen that doesn’t function correctly Extreme obesity (body mass index [BMI] >40) People who are pregnant.

What should people at higher risk Of serious illness With COVID•19 do?
If you are at higher risk Of getting very sick from COVID•19. you should: stock up on supplies: take everyday precautions to keep space between yourself and Others: when you go out in public. keep away from Others Who are sick limit close contact and wash your hands often: and avoid crowds. cruise travel. and non•essential travel. If there is an outbreak in your community. Stay home as much as possible. Watch for symptoms and emergency signs. Watch for symptoms and emergency signs. If you get sick. Stay home and tall your doctor. More information on how to prepare. What to do if you get sick. and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on people at Risk for Serious from COVID.19v

Dæs CDC recommend the use Of facemask to prevent COVID- 19?
CDC does not recommend that people Who are well wear a facemask to protect themselves from respiratory illnesses. including COVID•19. You should only wear a mask if a healthcare professional recommends it. A facemask should be used by people Who have COVID•19 and are showing symptoms. This is to protect Others from the risk Of getting infected. The use Of facemasks also is crucial for hea'th workers and other gs (at home or in a health care facility)

Am I at risk for COVID-19 from a package or products shipping from China? 
There is still a lot that is unknown about the new-Iy emerged COVID•19 and how it spreads. TWO Other coronaviruses have emerged previously to cause severe illness in people (MERS•COV and SARS•COV). The virus that causes COVID• 19 is more genetically related to SARS•COV than MERS•COV. but both are betacoronaviruses With their origins in bats. While we don't know for sure that this virus Will behave the same way as SARS•COV and MERS-COV, we can use the information gained from both Of these earlier coronaviruses to guide us. In general. because Of poor survivability Of these coronaviruses on surfaces. there is likely very low risk Of spread from products or packaging that are shipped over a period Of days or weeks at ambient temperatures. Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets. Currentty there is no evidence to support transmission Of COVID- 19 associated With imported goods and there have not been any cases Of COVID•19 in the United States associated with imported goods. Information will be provided on the as it becomes available.

What are the symptoms and complications that COVIC)- 19 can cause?
Current symptoms reported for patients With COVID•19 have included mdd to severe respiratory illness With fever-I, cough, and difficulty breathing.

Should I be tested for COVID-19?
If you develop symptoms such as fever. cough. and/or difficulty breathing and have been in close contact With a person known to have COVID- 19 or have recently traveled from an area With QngQ:ng Tread Stay home and call your healthcare provider. Older patients and individuals Who have severe underlying medical conditions or are immunocompromised should contact their healthcare provider early, even if their illness is mild. If you have severe symptoms. such as persistent pain or pressure in the chest. new confusion or inability to arouse. or bluish lips Of fate. contact your healthcare provider or emergency room and seek care immediately. Your doctor Will determine if you have signs and symptoms Of COVID•19 and whether you should be tested.

Can a person t6t negative and later test positive for COVID•19?
Using the CDC•deveIoped diagnostic test. a negative resuk means that the virus that causes COVID•19 was not found in the person's sample. In the earty stages Of infection. it is possible the virus Will not be detected. For COVID•19. a negative test result for a sample collected While a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID•19 virus is not causing their current illness.

Why might someone blame or avoid individuals and groups (create stigma) because Of COVID- 19?
People in the US. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID•19 is spreading. Some people are worried about the disease. Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, towards Chinese or other .Asian Americans or people who were in quarantine. Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people. a place, or a nation. Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID•19 spreads, a need to blame someone. fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths. Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger towards ordinary people instead of the disease that is
causing the problem.

HOW can people help Stop stigma related to COVID•19?
Healthcare Professionals and Health Departments What should healthcare professionals and health departrnents do?
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigatioro see Information for Healthcare Professionals. For information on specimen collection and see Information for Laboratories. For information for public health professional on COVID•19, see Information for Public Heath Professionals.

Am I at risk if I go to a funeral or visitation service for someone Who died Of COVID-197
There is currently no known risk associated With being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service With the
body Of someone Who died Of COVID-19.

Am I at risk if I touch Who died Of COVID- 19 after they have passed away? 
COVID•19 is a new and we are stul learning how it spreads. The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread trom close contact (i.e.. Within about 6 feet) With a person is currently sick With COVID•19. The virus spreads primarily tlrough respiratory droplets when an infected person coughs or sneezes. similar to how hfluenza and other respiratory *decoms spread. These droplets can land the mouths or noses Of
are neMby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs. This spread is not a conc«n after death It may be possible that a person can COVID-19 by toucNng a surface &ect hat has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth. nose. or possibly their eyes. but this is not thought to be the main way he virus spreads.

what is CDC doing about COVID-19? 
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes
available, CDC works 24/7 to protect people's health. More information about is
available online.

What about imported animals or animal products?
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading
COVID•19 in the United States. This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes
available, The LIS, Centers for Disease Control and prevention (CDC), the LI. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA),
and the LIS. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of
live animals and animal products into the United States. animals and animal products that pose a
threat to human health, UåPALgguIatesC:$ animals and animal products that pose a threat to agriculture; and
importation of endangered species and wildlife that can harm the health and welfare of humans, the
interests of agriculture, horticulture, or forestry, and the welfare and survival of wildlife resources.

Can I travel to the United States with dogs or import dogs into the united States during the COVID-19 outbreak?
Please refer to The current apply to dogs imported from China, a high•risk country for rabies.

What exactly is coronavirus?
COVID-19 is a newly identified respiratory virus in the coronavirus family, but it is more severe and spreads easily. Diagnosis is difficult because it shares several symptoms with influenza.

How is COVID-19 transmitted?
COVID-19 is thought to spread similarly to influenza. That is, it spreads person to person through respiratory droplets from an infected person's cough or sneeze. These droplets can land on surfaces within about 6 feet and can spread to other people after they contact these infected surfaces with their hands and subsequently touch their face.

Can I catch COVID-19 from contact with an object rather than a person?
Yes, you can catch COVID-19 from an object if the surface of that object has live virus on it. How long the virus can live outside an organism is unknown. Expert estimates range from a few hours to up to nine days, depending on the type of surface, surrounding temperature and environment.

Can a person have COVID-19 without having symptoms?
Yes.

Is there a vaccine for COVID-19?
There is currently no vaccine for COVID-19. The National Institutes of Health is developing a vaccine, but it will not be ready and approved for use for at least a year or more.

What should I do if I have symptoms of COVID-19?
If you have symptoms of COVID-19, call your local health care provider or hospital and ask how best to be evaluated. Do not go to your health care provider or hospital without calling first.

Is Mayo Clinic prepared to handle these COVID-19 cases?
Yes, Mayo Clinic is prepared to treat patients with COVID-19. Mayo also is prepared to do so at a pandemic level, if needed. That said, know that Mayo will treat patients as part of a community wide plan in coordination with public health authorities.

How is a patient assessed for COVID-19?
The basic premise of preventing disease transmission is to identify patients who show symptoms, isolate those patients from others for appropriate assessment, and inform appropriate staff and authorities for further response. If people appear with symptoms, they will be asked to wear a mask and answer a series of questions about their health and travel. Based on their answers and vital signs, they will be isolated from other patients while COVID-19 test results can be verified. This may take several days. Patients who test positive for COVID-19 are isolated and treated. Currently, there is no antiviral treatment for COVID-19. Specific interventions are taken in more severe cases, or with patients with compromised immune systems or complex illnesses.

What can I do to avoid COVID-19?
To avoid COVID-19, you should: Keep your hands clean. Avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth. Cover your cough and sneezes to keep germs from spreading to others. Clean and disinfect high-touch surfaces routinely. Avoid close contact with people who are sick. Stay home when you are sick.

Should I wear a face mask?
Regarding whether you should wear a face mask, the CDC provides this guidance: CDC does not recommend that people who are well wear a face mask to protect themselves from respiratory illnesses, including COVID-19. You should only wear a mask if a healthcare professional recommends it. A face mask should be used by people who have COVID-19 and are showing symptoms. This is to protect others from the risk of getting infected. The use of face masks also is crucial for health workers and other people who are taking care of someone infected with COVID-19 in close settings (at home or in a health care facility).

I am a cancer patient. What should I do to protect myself from COVID-19?
Because cancer treatments weaken the body's immune system, cancer patients are among those at risk for serious illness from COVID-19. The CDC recommends that people at higher risk for COVID-19:

Should I wear a face mask?
If you are a cancer patient, you should only wear a face mask if your care provider has recommended that you do so because you are at high risk for infection from causes other than COVID-19. If your care provider has not made this recommendation and you are not experiencing COVID-19 symptoms, you should not wear a face mask.

Experts say 95% and even 98% will recover and, further, the few percent that don’t, are elderly and also have other comprising conditions. This is typically exactly what happens with the elderly every flu season. So then why is everything being shut down?
That’s a very good question, but it brings up the whole issue of the overall number. With the flu, 99.9% of people get better. And the infection is all over. That’s only .1% of people — one in a thousand — actually die from the flu. Here we have maybe one in a hundred to three in a hundred. So, if you do the math, that’s 10 to 30 times more dangerous and fatal than the flu. If you add that on top of the flu, that’s a lot of people requiring healthcare and that’s a lot of people dying from an infection. We have to find out how many people really are infected before we figure out what the mortality rate is. We don’t know. It’s likely to come down, but it’s still going to be more than the flu. Even if it’s the same, it depends how many millions of people are infected. If you look at the paper that came out yesterday from Imperial College London about the modeling that they’ve done — its quite impressive. If 200 million get infected in the US — which is one of the models — that’s a lot of people who are going to expire from this disease.

Can you get this virus more than once?
Probably not. But there have been a couple cases that are thought to be relapses — in other words — they got better then they got worse again. Its not known whether they really got infected a second time. In general, you’re not going to get it a second time. You’ll develop immunity and then you won’t get it again."

I have a cold and am losing my voice. Should I be concerned and/or stay home?
A little controversial answer from me here. Yes, you should be concerned. Because some of the people with coronavirus have very, very mild symptoms. And now that the testing is more available — which is another issue altogether — everybody with a respiratory symptom should be checked for coronavirus. This is going against the policies of the public health people, but as a clinician who takes of patients: anybody with a respiratory infection needs to be checked. I’ve seen too many people on television giving the interview how they tried very hard with these symptoms to get tested, they can’t get tested because they don’t meet some crazy criteria. We don’t want just the tip of the iceberg."

I was diagnosed with several autoimmune diseases and on immunosuppressant drugs, should I wear a mask when I go out?
I’m very sorry about your underlying condition, but let me tell you this: A mask is not going to help you. The mask actually does not help prevent getting this disease. If you have a respiratory infection and you go outside for whatever — you should wear a mask. But to prevent the disease the mask does not work. Its a waste of time. On the other hand, if you are immunocompromised — you have a disease that you’re taking some kind of immunosuppressant medication, even if you’re an older person, just a risk over 60 years of age, what the recommendations are now is that you should not be going out."

Of the confirmed cases of the virus in Illinois, how many of those required hospitalization? Also, does that number of confirmed cases include people who had it and are now free of the virus?  If so how many?
All I know is that 105 people have been confirmed. Two of them have completely gotten rid of the virus and are cured from the disease. The other three are 'active cases.' Some of them are in the hospital, most of them are not."

What are the symptoms of COVID-19, and what do people do if they suspect they have been infected?
There are three criterion: fever with cough and shortness of breath, contact with someone who has travelled, or if someone has a pneumonia and we can’t figure out why they have it. If you think you have the virus, call the COVID-19 hotline (1-877-644-4545). They will tell you if you need to go to a test centre. You really don’t want to go to a clinic; you really don’t want to go to the ER unless you’re really sick and you need (urgent care).

How do people contract the illness?
The most common questions I get are: ‘I have a package that was delivered. Can I get the virus (from the box)?’ Or: ‘My newspaper was delivered and I’m not sure the delivery person was healthy. Should I touch the newspaper?’ We know the cold virus and influenza can survive a fair amount of time on an inanimate surface. COVID-19 is probably the same in that sense, but it’s not going to be transmitted by a newspaper or package. It’s going to be sharing the same computer or door handle. If you want to reduce your risk, it’s simple and straight forward: wash your hands — then the risk is gone.

A lot of people are panicking, while others are not taking the government’s public health orders seriously enough. What is the right amount of concern people should have?
We need to be concerned, but not panic stricken. We need to be aware, but not paranoid. I think we want to avoid people getting sick. That’s the reasonable approach. So, wash your hands, keep yourself in the best possible shape you can by trying to get enough sleep, eating properly and getting exercise.

Why did the government put in place measures when so few people had tested positive for the virus?
Early is important, because you have to catch it before it has a time to flare up. If we get on it early — as we are trying to do right now — maybe we can avoid what we saw in countries like China and what we’re seeing right now in Italy and Spain. All it takes is a handful of people who disregard the warnings and become ill and spread it in the community for us to have a disaster.

How have hospitals prepared for this outbreak?
From the very first moment we heard about coronavirus in January, all the hospitals were on high alert. All the hospital emergency rooms are preparing for a surge of cases. They have been inventoring their equipment and supplies and their ability to expand as required.

Who is most at risk of getting very ill or dying from the virus?
About 80 per cent of people will have a cold and will not be at risk. There is a percentage of people who will be tremendous at risk. It seems to be older people and whether it’s a function of age or frailty we’re not sure yet. So someone with an underlying health issue, someone with multiple medical problems, these are the people who I am most concerned about right now.

We hear about a number of people who have tested positive for the virus. Are there people who have it and have not been tested?
I’m willing to bet there are a lot of people out there who have a few sniffles, a sore throat, a low-grade fever, maybe a bit of a cough who are out there who have the virus. Is that dangerous or bad? As long as they are isolating themselves and not spreading it to other people, it’s not. If you’re at home, as long as you’re staying at home, you’re doing exactly what needs to be done, whatever the bug is.

So why is the virus so dangerous?
The scary thing is not that we can’t treat these people. I’m sure we can. The scary thing is what if we get hit with a tsunami of cases? I’m not sure we can handle that. So the real answer is to contain it now — and that’s within everyone’s grasp.

What is COVID-19 ("Coronavirus")?
The 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) is a new illness that was first identified in Wuhan, China, in December 2019, with patients reporting cases of fever and acute respiratory illness. Since that time, other countries, including the U.S., have seen cases of the illness.

How is the virus transmitted?
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in many different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats. Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people such as with MERS and SARS. Many of the early patients in the pneumonia outbreak caused by COVID-19 in Wuhan, China had some link to a large seafood and live animal market, suggesting animal-to-person spread. However, person-to-person spread is now occurring. 

Person-to-person spread is believed to occur via respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes. These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby, or possibly be inhaled into the lungs. It may be possible for a person to get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads. There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing. The latest situation summary updates are available on the CDC’s webpage Coronavirus Disease 2019.

What are the symptoms of COVID-19?
Patients with confirmed COVID-19 infection have reportedly had mild to severe respiratory illness with symptoms of: Fever Cough
Shortness of breath The CDC believes at this time that symptoms of COVID-19 may appear in as few as 2 days or as long as 14 after exposure. 

How can COVID-19 infection be prevented?
There is currently no vaccine to prevent COVID-19 infection. The best way to prevent infection is to avoid being exposed to this virus.  As a reminder, the CDC always recommends everyday preventive actions to help prevent the spread of respiratory viruses, including:  Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer. Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands. Avoid close contact with people who are sick.  Stay home when you are sick. Cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue, then throw the tissue in the trash. Clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces.

Who should seek medical treatment?
Patients with fever and/or acute respiratory illness who have traveled in the past 14 days to an area affected by COVID-19, or who have had close contact with someone who is under investigation for, or lab-confirmed, with COVID-19 should seek medical attention.  You should call ahead before going to the doctor or emergency room, describe your symptoms and identify when you traveled to an affected area.

What is UK doing for the safety and wellness of its community?
The University is continually communicating and working with UK students currently on Education Abroad programs and other members of the UK community who plan to travel internationally.We are fortunate to have a nationally ranked academic medical center on our campus, with a highly regarded Division of Infectious Diseases that is working closely with the University on these issues as well.We also have a small workgroup, comprised of campus administrators and health officials, focused on this issue. They have been meeting at least weekly for more than a month to monitor the issue, formulate responses, and determine next steps.

I have a doctor’s appointment – should I be worried about getting infected with COVID-19 at UK hospital or UK clinic?
All hospitals and clinics have protocols and systems in place to keep patients, visitors and health care workers safe. You should not avoid seeking care out of concerns over the coronavirus. If you are experiencing flu-like symptoms, call your health care provider first so they can advise you.

WHY ARE OLDER ADULTS AND PEOPLE WITH CHRONIC HEALTH CONDITIONS AT HIGHER RISK?
Older adults and people who have chronic medical conditions including heart disease, lung disease, diabetes, cancer, and hypertension are at higher risk for more serious COVID-19 illness and death. This is because our immune systems grow weaker as we age, which makes it more challenging for older adults to fight off infectious diseases. Chronic diseases are more common with age, can compromise the immune system, and make people more vulnerable to serious complications. Because of the rapid spread of COVID-19, the CDC recently issued a warning for people who are at the highest risk for serious illness from the virus. It is imperative older adults and others who are at high risk heed the advice of the CDC.

WHAT ARE THE SYMPTOMS OF COVID-19 AND HOW IS IT DIFFERENT FROM FLU AND ALLERGIES?
The main symptoms of COVID-19, which may appear between 2 to 14 days after exposure, include: fever, cough, and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Not everyone with COVID-19 will experience symptoms, or they may be mild enough that they are dismissed, but they can still be contagious. These symptoms can also seem similar to flu and seasonal allergies but there are some differences.

WHEN SHOULD I CALL A HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONAL?
It is important to call a healthcare professional as soon as possible if you think you may have been exposed to COVID-19 and begin to develop symptoms. It is important to call first, so that the clinic or hospital can prepare and prevent the spread of infection.

HOW DO THEY TEST FOR COVID-19?
To diagnose a potential case, healthcare professionals may run tests to rule out influenza and other common infections. Not all healthcare facilities are able to test for COVID-19 at this time. The test involves swabbing the nose and throat, and taking samples of any saliva and mucus that is coughed up. They may also draw blood.

WILL I HAVE TO PAY FOR TESTING?
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is taking important steps to waive cost-sharing for COVID-19-related testing and treatment to ensure all patients who need it have access to care. Medicare and Medicare Advantage Plans will cover lab tests for COVID-19 with no out-of-pocket costs, any necessary hospital care, and telehealth services including virtual check-ins and full visits for those living in rural areas.

HOW CAN I BEST PROTECT MYSELF?
COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly between people in close contact with one another through respiratory droplets from coughs or sneezes. It may also be transmitted when you touch a surface or object with the virus on it, then touch your mouth, nose, or eyes.It is important to avoid people who may be infected. CDC recently issued an advisory for older adults and adults with underlying health issues to avoid: Crowded places, Non-essential air travel, and Cruise ships This is an important advisory to follow, because there is currently no vaccine available to prevent COVID-19 and no specific antiviral medication to treat it. The best way to prevent illness is to avoid being exposed to the virus altogether. Proper handwashing is also imperative to preventing COVID-19 infection and spread. Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, sneezing, or being in a public place. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60 percent alcohol. As much as possible, avoid handshaking and touching high-traffic surfaces in public places–for example, elevator buttons, door handles, handrails, or counters. Use a tissue or your sleeve to cover your hand or finger if you must touch something. Avoid touching your face, nose, eyes, etc. Although there is no vaccine available to prevent COVID-19 at this time, you should still ensure that you and your family’s vaccinations are up to date, including influenza (flu) and pneumococcal (pneumonia) vaccines. This will help reduce the pressure on the healthcare system by reducing vaccine-preventable disease. The CDC does not recommend people who are well wear a facemask to protect themselves from COVID-19. Facemasks should be used by people who show symptoms of COVID-19 to help prevent the spread of the disease to others. The use of facemasks is also crucial for healthcare workers and caregivers who are taking care of individuals in close settings (at home or in a healthcare facility).

HOW CAN I PREPARE TO BE AT HOME FOR AN EXTENDED PERIOD OF TIME?
Public health experts are warning people that it is only a matter of time before the virus appears in local communities across the US. Here are some simple ways to prepare: Getting Medicines and Medical Supplies Ask your physician or local pharmacy if ordering your medicines online is an option. Many online pharmacies (including national chains) will fill valid prescriptions and ship them directly to your door allowing you to avoid going to the pharmacy in person. CMS is also working with private plans to waive prescription drug refill limits and to relax restrictions on home or mail delivery of prescription drugs. However, only order from a reputable online pharmacy. The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) warns consumers about rogue online pharmacies that claim to sell prescription medicines at deeply discounted prices. Read the FDA warning here. If you have questions, call a healthcare professional. Also, be sure you have over-the-counter medicines and medical supplies (fever reducers, tissues, hydrating beverages, etc.) to treat fever and other symptoms.

HOW CAN I HELP LOVED ONES AT RISK?
Everyone has a role to play in reducing community spread. The same recommendations for people at risk should be adhered to by everyone to help protect the more vulnerable in our communities. Businesses, schools, and local and federal government should all work together to mitigate community spread of COVID-19 and help protect older adults and those with pre-existing medical conditions. If you are a caregiver for someone in a long-term care facility, respect their rules on who can come and go, ask about the health of the other residents frequently, and know the plan if there is an outbreak.If your loved ones live alone, check on them frequently and find out what services your local Area Agency on Aging offers.

WHAT SHOULD I DO IF I GET SICK?
If you do get sick, first call a healthcare professional. Unless you need immediate medical care, you should stay at home to avoid spreading your illness. Stay in touch with others by phone or email. You may need to ask for help from friends, family, neighbors, community health workers, and others if you become sick. Determine who can provide you with care if your caregiver gets sick. If you or a loved one needs help, contact your local public health department to connect with caregiving services.  If you develop emergency warning signs for COVID-19, call 9-1-1 and get medical attention immediately. In adults, emergency warning signs include: Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, Persistent pain or pressure in the chest, New confusion or inability to arouse, and/or Bluish lips or face WHAT ARE OTHER RELIABLE RESOURCES FOR THE MOST UP-TO-DATE INFORMATION?

I am a healthcare worker. Am I allowed to work?
There are different rules for healthcare workers. Healthcare personnel in the Netherlands is essential in combating the coronavirus (COVID-19) and for the treatment of patients. This is an important task that cannot be omitted. Do not stay at home until you have symptoms such as runny nose or a cough and a fever. If necessary, consult your employer. Do not travel abroad. More information

I have a vital profession, and I have children, what should I do?
Children of people with a vital profession such as health care or police, can go to school or to a daycare facility. See rijksoverheid.nl/coronavirus for more information about the occupations to which this applies and how this works.

Are the measures of 15 March to close schools, cafes, restaurants and sport clubs useful?
The novel coronavirus is spreading in the Netherlands. The measures announced on 15 March should slow down the spread, which will prevent a peak load of health care capacity. Because of the measures, the disease can still spread, but at a slower pace.

Why is it not useful to introduce a lock-down in the Netherlands?
A complete ban on going outdoors has no added value. Indeed, the novel coronavirus will not be able to spread as quickly, but no one will be able to build up immunity against the disease. Since the disease is spread worldwide, there is a good chance that, after lifting a lock-down, many people will become ill at the same time in a short period. So with a lock-down, you mainly postpone the moment that many people become ill at the same time, and we do not want that.

How can you control the spread of an infectious disease?
Containing an infectious disease is done by preventing infections through early detection of the source and contacts. For each patient, the Municipal Public Health Service (GGD) maps out who could be infected. We call these people contacts. They, as well, have to keep an eye on their health and pass this information on to the GGD. As soon as they get symptoms, they are isolated, and the GGD tracks down their contacts again. In this way, you can significantly reduce the spread. This is called containment.

What if the disease can no longer be contained?
For some diseases, it is difficult to control new infections. This can have all kinds of causes, such as undetected contact, people reporting too late, or there are too many patients to monitor. In that case, the disease will spread at a certain point. The control approach then changes to limiting the number of patients (mitigation). The main aim of mitigation is to reduce the number of patients so that an overload of health services is limited. 

How can you limit the consequences of an infectious disease?
If containment does not work sufficiently, general measures are necessary. These apply not only to all patients and contacts but to the general population. You want people to have as little contact with each other as possible and that everyone avoids social contacts and stays at home as soon as they are ill. If people are ill and have mild symptoms, they should stay at home and let the illness take its course. Only if they have severe symptoms or a fragile health is it necessary to call the GP. Because all people with symptoms have to stay at home, spreading is prevented as much as possible. By not treating people with mild symptoms, the healthcare capacity remains available for people who need it the most. This phase is called mitigation. 

Why am I no longer allowed to shake hands?
Via hands, viruses such as the new coronavirus spread quickly. Many people also (unnoticed) often sit with their hands on their nose or mouth. By not shaking hands anymore, you reduce the chance of getting infected and infecting others with the novel coronavirus.

Why is it important to wash your hands often?
Via hands, viruses spread very quickly. By washing your hands well and regularly, you reduce the chance that you will become ill, but also that you will infect others. See rivm.nl/hygiene for tips on how to wash your hands properly.

Why is it there a call to work at home as much as possible?
The novel coronavirus can spread in places where people are in close contact with each other. This can be at work, such as at the office, but also in public transport, for example. When people work from home, they have less contact with others and are less likely to be in places where many people are present at the same time. This helps to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus.

Why should I keep my arm in front of my mouth when sneezing or coughing and my hands?
Through hands, viruses such as the novel coronavirus spread easily. Many people also (unnoticed) often sit with their hands on their nose or mouth. By sneezing or coughing in your arm you reduce the chance of getting infected and infecting others with the new coronavirus.

What is meant by social distancing?
By social distancing, you have less contact with others, or you keep a distance from others. This reduces the chance that you will infect each other. Examples include: working from home, or spreading working hours if working from home is not possible. Staying at home with respiratory problems and avoiding places where many people can get together.

What measures are in place in the Netherlands to prevent the spread of the coronavirus? 
RIVM National Institute for Public Health and the Environment   advises the Dutch government on tackling the novel coronavirus. An overview of these measures can be found at www.government.nl.

Are children a source of infection?
Mainly people who cough or sneeze a lot can quickly spread the novel coronavirus. Children often develop no or very mild symptoms of the disease. As a result, children are not a major source of infection for the disease.

Can my children still play outside with others?
From the data that is now known, children seem to be contributing little to the spread of COVID-19. They can, therefore, play with others if they do not have any symptoms that are consistent with COVID-19, such as fever, a cold or a cough.

Can I still go shopping?
If you don't have any symptoms such as a fever, a cough or a cold, you can go and do some grocery shopping. If you keep an arm's length away from others, the chance that others will infect you with COVID-19 or that you will infect others is small.

Can I still walk the dog?
If you do not have any symptoms such as a fever, a cough or a cold, you can walk your dog. If you keep an arm's length away from others, there is little chance that others can infect you with COVID-19 or that you can infect others.

Is it useful that restaurants, cafes and sport clubs close down?
The novel coronavirus is spreading from human to human. If there are fewer places where many people come together, the disease can spread less quickly. For this reason, RIVM previously advised cancelling major events. Closing down other venues such as cafes, restaurants and gyms further reduces the risk of transmitting the virus.

Schools are closed as of 16 March. Why did RIVM previously advice that schools could stay open?
Children do not often get symptoms when they have been infected with the novel coronavirus. That is why RIVM expects children to have a small contribution to the spread of COVID-19. That was the reason why RIVM advised not to close the schools. 

Can I still visit my parents?
Anyone older than 70 and people with underlying health conditions are extra vulnerable if they are infected with COVID-19. For this reason, limit contact with these groups and certainly do not visit them if you have symptoms such as fever, a cough or a cold.

I'm worried about my health. What should I do?
Do you have a nose cold, cough, sore throat or fever?
Stay at home, allow the illness to run its course and make sure that you do not infect others. You should, therefore, distance yourself from other people.  You do not have to call the GP. Your symptoms are mild.

Do you have severe symptoms?
Such as a fever (more than 38 degrees Celsius) and a cough or breathing difficulties? Then you should call the GP. If the complaints are consistent with COVID-19, you will no longer be tested by default.

What are the symptoms of a mild cold?
Mild cold symptoms are nasal colds (a lot of sneezing), runny nose, sneezing, sore throat and light cough and a slight temperature up to 38.0 degrees Celsius.

How long do you have to stay at home if you have a temperature or cold?
As soon as your symptoms have gone, you can return to your work the next day. 

I am pregnant, should I be particularly worried?
No. We see that the virus infection has the same course as in women who are not pregnant. As far as we know, there is no increased risk of miscarriage or birth defects due to infection with this virus.

What happens if someone is suspected of having the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)?
If someone reports to a general practitioner with symptoms and the GP thinks that the patient may have the novel coronavirus, a protocol is put into action. The GP asks for a test at RIVM National Institute for Public Health and the Environment   and the Erasmus University Medical Center. Both laboratories start testing simultaneously. Meanwhile, the suspect patient is kept in isolation, either at home or at the hospital. That depends on the situation. If the test comes back positive, the patient remains in isolation and the Municipal Public Health Service (GGD) carries out a so-called contact investigation. All people with whom the patient has been in contact during the infectious period must monitor their health during the incubation period. If they develop symptoms of the disease, they must report this to the GGD. The whole process then starts again from the beginning.

How do you know if you are cured of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)?
If you feel better and have not had any symptoms about 24 hours, you are cured. You will no longer be infectious to others.

What is the advice for people with other health problems such as asthma, COPD, diabetes?
Follow up the basic hygiene measures and keep clear from sick people. These measures apply to all viruses that can cause the flu and colds. 

My housemate has returned from an area with many novel coronavirus infections and has health problems. Do I have to stay at home now?
No, you do not have to stay at home. Sick housemates have to limit physical contact with others. That means they are not allowed to go to work/school. Working from home is possible. They are allowed to go outside for a while to do some shopping, for example, but they have to make sure that they stay at a distance from others and do not make physical contact.

I have been on holiday in an area with many novel coronavirus infections and now I have symptoms, what should I do?
Keep an eye on your health. If you have a cold, or a fever of up to 38 degrees Celsius, stay at home and get well first. Do not infect others in the meantime. Call your GP if you have a fever (more than 38 degrees Celsius) and you are coughing or having difficulty breathing. See the list of areas with widespread transmission.

I am worried. Can I be tested?
No. It only makes sense for you to be tested if you display symptoms. The first days of the infection, there is not enough virus present in the body. A test will not confirm that you are infected with the virus. That is why we only test for the virus when people display symptoms.

What can I do to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus?
Stay at home with symptoms such as a runny nose, cough, sore throat or a fever. Avoid social contacts.
If you do not have any symptoms, work from home as much as possible or try to spread your working hours.
Make sure you follow up basic hygiene measures: Wash your hands with soap regularly
Cough and sneeze on the inside of your elbow Use paper handkerchief Do not shake hands 

Does it make sense to wear face masks to protect yourself against the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)?
In the Netherlands, we only recommend face masks for medical personnel. The problem is that it only helps if you use special masks that close very well over your nose and mouth. You need to use the masks very precisely and change them regularly. This is almost impossible in daily use.

Can I become infected if I order a package from China?
Coronaviruses spread through humans and animals. They cannot survive well outside the body, certainly not on cardboard, packaging material or other items. Other coronaviruses do not spread in this way and we have no reason to believe that it is any different for this novel coronavirus (COVID-19).

Can the novel coronavirus also spread through the air?
Coughing and sneezing causes the virus to come out through the nose, throat or lungs. The virus gets into the air in small droplets. These droplets do not float in the air but descend quickly. The sicker a person is, the more virus they can spread. So far, there is no evidence that the virus can stay airborne for a long time and spread in this manner.

Is the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) more severe than the regular flu?
At this point, we do not know how severe novel coronavirus (COVID-19) is. The current official numbers do not appear to be alarming. However, we do not know precisely how much delay occurs in data reporting, and whether there is underreporting and the extend of it. The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) is a new virus. Therefore, it is vital to obtain very detailed information to determine precisely how dangerous the virus is. More information is needed about the spread of the virus, also about the people who become only slightly ill or not at all ill. And of all the people who become ill, you want to know where they have been.

Can someone without symptoms transmit the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)?
The novel coronavirus is transmitted by coughing and sneezing. So far, the transmission of the virus by someone without these symptoms seems to play a minimal role. The virus is transmitted from one person to another via coughing or sneezing. The sicker a person becomes, the more likely he is to spread the virus. By coughing and sneezing, a person transmits the virus through his nose, throat or lungs. The virus gets into the air through small droplets. If other people inhale these droplets or transfer them via their hands in their mouth, nose or eyes, for example, they can become infected with the virus. 

Could the incubation period be much longer than 14 days?
The estimated incubation period has been stable for a long time. The incubation period has been estimated based on data of many patients. It varies from 2 to 12 days; for safety reasons, we use 14 days. If someone reports a longer incubation period, there could also be an unnoticed contact that took place in between, which makes the incubation period only seem longer.

Can the novel coronavirus be spread through cash?
The risk of people being infected through cash is very small. It probably plays only a very small role in the spread of the disease in China. However, the government in China is doing everything it can to prevent the spread, and this measure is apparently also being taken.  With regard to packages from China, these are in transit for several days. If they were infected with the novel coronavirus, the virus would not survive the journey. So it is safe to order packages from China.  Since the novel coronavirus can be transmitted through dirty hands, regular hand washing is a good measure to prevent the spread of the disease.

How long can the novel coronavirus survive outside the body?
A virus always needs a human or animal to stay alive and multiply. Outside the body, the virus can only survive for a short time. We do not yet know how long that might be exactly.

How quickly can you recover after being infected?
This depends on the severity of the symptoms. People with mild symptoms recover faster (after a few days). People who are hospitalised generally need more time to recover (sometimes weeks).

What is the official name of the novel coronavirus?
There are several coronaviruses – viruses that look like a crown (corona means crown in Latin). Known examples are MERS and SARS.  In December 2019, a novel coronavirus outbreak originated in China. The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) has called this specific virus SARS -CoV -2. This name was chosen because the virus belongs to the SARS family of coronaviruses. SARS stands for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. This virus can cause you to get ill with the disease that is officially named COVID-19. This name was chosen by the WHO. The addition ‘19’ refers to the year 2019 when it was first discovered. 

What can we say about the degree of infectiousness during the incubation period?
The novel coronavirus is transmitted through coughing and sneezing. Until now, the transmission of the virus seems to play a very limited role during the incubation period, that is before symptoms appear. What is known, however, is that the sicker a person is, the more they spread the virus.

What are the symptoms of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)?
Symptoms are a fever with respiratory symptoms such as coughing, shortness of breath and pneumonia.

How serious is the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)?
What we now know is that of all the identified patients with the novel coronavirus, about 17% have serious symptoms. This ratio may change in the coming months. It is quite possible that we are currently only identifying relatively seriously ill patients. About 2% of patients die from the novel coronavirus. These are mainly older people and people who are weakened by other diseases.

Is there a treatment for the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)?
There is no specific treatment for the novel coronavirus. Treatment of seriously ill people consists of counteracting symptoms. For example, physicians can provide extra oxygen to patients who are short of breath.

I HAVE A LUNG CONDITION. AM I AT MORE RISK OF GETTING COVID-19 THAN SOMEBODY WHO DOESN’T HAVE A LUNG CONDITION?
No - the infection can be caught by anyone. However, people with underlying lung conditions might be more likely to show symptoms of the infection or to have a more severe infection than others. So far, most people that get COVID-19 have a mild viral illness, but some people develop a chest infection/pneumonia. We are not yet certain if people with lung conditions are more likely to get a chest infection after COVID-19, but it is likely since this is the case with other viruses like flu.

ARE THERE ANY ADDITIONAL MEASURES THAT I SHOULD TAKE TO LIMIT MY RISK OF GETTING SICK AS I HAVE A LUNG CONDITION?
Follow the advice from your country’s health authorities - this will be slightly different in each country depending on how many cases there are in your country. There are things that everyone should do to limit their risk. If you have a lung condition the following are important: Avoid contact with anyone who is sick. Ask sick friends or relatives not to visit you and keep distance of at least 2 metres from anyone sick that you encounter in public. Do not touch your mouth, nose or eyes with unwashed hands unless unavoidable. Wash your hands thoroughly after touching surfaces that may be contaminated. Wash your hands with warm water and soap for 20 seconds. Make sure you take all of your regular medications and keep up with your usual treatments to keep your lungs as healthy as possible.
 
SHOULD I CONSIDER SELF-ISOLATING TO AVOID CATCHING THE VIRUS?
Self-isolating means staying indoors as much as possible and avoiding contact with others. The advice on self-isolation is different in different countries at the moment, but the following are sensible steps that apply to all countries in Europe: If you have symptoms of fever, cough or a chest infection you should self-isolate. If you do not have symptoms, avoid contact with anyone who is sick, even if they “just have a mild cold”. Stay at home as much as possible, including working from home if this is feasible. If you are in an area with a high number of COVID-19 cases, you may be asked to do a more strict isolation (such as is the case with Northern Italy at the moment).
 
AM I SAFE OUTSIDE OF THE HOUSE PROVIDED I AVOID CROWDED AREAS E.G. CAN I GO TO THE PARK OR WALK OUTSIDE?
Yes. The virus is caught from people that have the infection and so there is no problem in going outside by yourself. What is important is to avoid contact with anyone who might be ill. Events outside where a large number of people are together have been cancelled around Europe and so you should not be attending any events or meetings where large numbers of people are coming together.

ARE PEOPLE WITH RESPIRATORY DISEASE MORE LIKELY TO DIE OF COVID-19 THAN THOSE WITHOUT?
So far, older age and the presence of underlying conditions - including lung conditions - have been risk factors for death. Nevertheless, it is important to emphasise that most patients, even those with underlying respiratory disease, have had mild infections and have fully recovered.

SHOULD I WEAR A MASK TO PROTECT MYSELF FROM THE VIRUS?
For the general population wearing a mask is only recommended if you are experiencing symptoms, such as a cough or a fever, or if you are caring for someone with these symptoms. Wearing a mask if you have a respiratory condition is not recommended as this may make breathing more difficult. If you have a respiratory condition and are concerned about catching COVID-19, discuss this with your doctor. To prevent shortages of face masks it is important to only use them if needed. When wearing a mask, it is important to use and dispose of them in the correct way. The World Health Organization has useful information about this.  

CAN I CATCH COVID-19 FROM MY PET?
There is currently no evidence that humans can catch the disease from common household animals such as cats and dogs.

CAN PEOPLE CATCH COVID-19 MORE THAN ONCE?
The current research suggests that immunity to COVID-19 develops after the first infection and so it is not possible to catch it again. There are examples of viruses, like flu and the common cold, which can be caught more than once because of the way the virus changes over time. We won’t know for a while whether this can happen with COVID-19.

AS PART OF MY CONDITION, I REGULARLY HAVE A DRY COUGH AND FEVER – IS THERE A WAY TO DISTINGUISH THESE SYMPTOMS WITH THOSE OF COVID-19? 
No. There is nothing unique about the symptoms of COVID-19 and this is why most people who are tested for the virus do not have it. Their cough and fever are actually caused by something else. If you have a cough and fever that is typical for you, and you are not unwell enough to need hospital treatment, you should self-isolate at home until the symptoms have resolved.

DUE TO MY CONDITION, I USUALLY GET MORE ILL WHEN I GO TO HOSPITAL – SHOULD I AVOID GOING TO HOSPITAL TO REDUCE MY RISK OF CATCHING COVID-19?
Hospitals across Europe are likely to be very over-stretched in the coming months because of patients with COVID-19. If you can manage at home and do not need hospital treatment, please make every effort to avoid going to hospital. Use alternative services, such as community pharmacies and telephone services, wherever possible. Nevertheless, hospitals are there to help if you are ill enough to need hospital treatment and will be practicing very strict hygiene measures to avoid people catching COVID-19 from visits to hospital.

MY NEIGHBOURS OFTEN SMOKE IN THEIR GARDEN AND THE SMOKE COMES INTO MY HOUSE IF THE WINDOWS ARE OPEN. CAN COVID-19 BE TRANSMITTED THROUGH EXHALED SMOKE?
There is no evidence that COVID-19 can be transmitted through smoke, but passive smoke exposure can still be harmful to people with lung conditions in other ways. It might be worth closing the windows if your neighbours are smoking.

I USE AN INHALER, CAN IT BECOME INFECTED? WHAT CAN I DO TO PREVENT IT? SHOULD I GET A NEW INHALER OR JUST CLEAN MY CURRENT ONE?
Your inhaler should only be used by you, and it should be kept clean and stored in a safe place where it cannot be handled by others. In this way, you can avoid the inhaler being a source of infection. There is no need to get a new one.

IS THERE A RISK OF MY MEDICATION BECOMING INFECTED IF IT IS PRODUCED SOMEWHERE WITH A HIGH RATE OF COVID-19?
No - medications are manufactured according to very strict and very carefully controlled hygiene standards. Even if these systems were to fail for any reason, the virus is not able to survive for long periods on surfaces like cardboard (for medication packs) or plastic (for devices like inhalers). Therefore, by the time the medication has been shipped from the countries in question to the pharmacy and has been given to you, the virus would be dead.

CAN I INCREASE MY NORMAL DOSAGE OF TREATMENTS TO PROTECT MYSELF FROM COVID-19?
It is very important not to make any changes to your treatment while the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing. Your treatments help to keep your lungs healthy and any changes to your treatment that have not been recommended by a healthcare professional could put you at higher risk of a flare-up of your lung condition. The health service in many countries is likely to be overwhelmed over the coming months and so keeping everyone as healthy as possible is key to reducing the burden on doctors and hospitals. Please take all of your medications exactly as prescribed.

THE NEWS SAYS THAT THE WORST AFFECTED BY COVID-19 ARE THE OLDER AGE POPULATION AND ‘PEOPLE’ WITH PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS. ARE ‘PEOPLE WITH PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS’ ALSO OLDER OR DOES THIS REFER TO PEOPLE OF ANY AGE?
Most people dying from COVID-19 in the reports from China and other countries have been aged over 80 years and have had advanced heart and lung conditions. They have had a combination of older age and severe pre-existing conditions. The majority of both older people and people with pre-existing conditions have had a mild viral illness and have fully recovered.

WHAT PREVENTATIVE MEASURES SHOULD I TAKE IF I USE OXYGEN AT HOME / IF I USE A NEBULISER?
If you use oxygen at home, this usually indicates that you have quite a severe underlying lung condition and so you should take steps to reduce your risk of getting COVID-19. These include: Avoid contact with anyone who is sick. Ask sick friends or relatives not to visit you and keep a distance of at least 2 metres from anyone sick that you encounter in public.
Avoiding touching your mouth, nose or eyes with unwashed hands. Wash your hands thoroughly after touching surfaces that may be contaminated. Wash your hands with warm water and soap for 20 seconds.
Make sure you take all of your regular medications and keep up with your usual treatments to keep your lungs as healthy as possible.
 
I KNOW THAT I SHOULD NOT GO TO THE HOSPITAL IF I THINK I AM INFECTED, BUT WHEN SHOULD I SEEK MEDICAL ATTENTION IF I HAVE A PRE-EXISTING LUNG CONDITION?
If you think you have COVID-19 infection, ask yourself if you can manage the symptoms at home. Fever can be managed with paracetamol and drinking lots of fluids. If the symptoms are severe or you need additional advice, please contact your primary healthcare provider.

SHOULD I GO AHEAD WITH SCHEDULED APPOINTMENTS OR SHOULD I AVOID GOING TO MEDICAL CENTRES OR HOSPITALS?
If your hospital is still running scheduled outpatient appointments, it would be a good idea to contact them and ask if you should still attend. Many places are cancelling routine appointments or conducting them over the phone wherever possible. There are certain conditions where face-to-face visits are still required and you should not miss a visit without first consulting your consultant, doctor, nurse or other healthcare provider.

I HAD THE FLU VACCINE THIS YEAR, AM I PROTECTED FROM THIS VIRUS?
The flu vaccination only protects against the flu (influenza virus) and does not protect against COVID-19. There is no vaccine for COVID-19 and it is not likely that one will become available during the current pandemic.

WHAT IS BEING DONE TO PROTECT THE VULNERABLE POPULATION (ELDERLY, PEOPLE WITH HEALTH CONDITIONS)?
To protect older people and those with underlying health conditions, most European countries have adopted “social distancing” and self-isolation procedures. This means asking people to stay at home more than usual, practice good hand hygiene and keeping their distance in public to reduce transmission.

WHAT IS THE BEST SOURCE THAT PATIENT ORGANISATIONS CAN USE TO GET THEIR INFORMATION ABOUT COVID-19?
It is very important to ensure that you are accessing information from a trusted source. We would recommended that you go to: The World Health Organization The European Centre for Disease Control (ECDC) The European Respiratory Society The Platform for European Preparedness Against (Re)emerging Epidemics (PREPARE)
 
WHAT ARE ORGANISATIONS IN EUROPE DOING ABOUT THE SITUATION?
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control is focusing on containing the virus by identifying and testing suspected cases as early as possible, and limiting the impact of the disease by securing preparedness services and personal measures such as hand washing. The ERS and PREPARE have teamed up to produce a series of webinars about COVID-19 which you can watch here.

SHOULD I BE WORRIED ABOUT MEDICATION SHORTAGES?
Everything is being done to ensure that the supplies of essential medications are maintained. There is no cause for concern. The European Medicines Agency are monitoring the situation and to date have reported no shortage of essential medications.

MY PARTNER HAS TO TRAVEL BY PLANE FOR TREATMENT IN LONDON FOR HIS CONDITION. WHAT CAN WE DO TO KEEP HIM SAFE?
Travel for people with underlying conditions should be limited as much as possible and restricted to only essential trips. In this case, if the trip is essential, you should follow the steps outlined at the top of this page, including practicing good hand hygiene during every part of the trip. 

SHOULD I AVOID USING PUBLIC TRANSPORT? / WHAT IS THE BEST TYPE OF TRANSPORT TO USE?
For patients with underlying lung conditions, we suggest limiting journeys as much as possible. Public transport, such as bus and train journeys, may be necessary, in which case the best way to reduce the risk of transmission is to wash your hands thoroughly before and after the journey, avoid touching your face, nose and eyes, and try to maintain a distance of more than 2 metres from other passengers if possible. Public transport with the fewest passengers or that limits your contact with potentially sick people is the best, but we recognise that some journeys are unavoidable.

SHOULD I BE WORRIED ABOUT SENDING MY CHILD TO SCHOOL?
Many countries in Europe have now closed schools in response to the outbreak. If your country has not yet closed schools, we recommend following the advice from your school and local government. Children can contract COVID-19, but most frequently have a mild viral illness. The risk to your child and any risk to you as a person with lung disease should be discussed with your school before a decision to take your child out of school is taken.

MY CHILD HAS A LUNG CONDITION. WHAT SHOULD I BE DOING TO PROTECT THEM?
If they are old enough, ensure they have been taught about how to wash their hands properly and to avoid touching their mouth, nose and eyes with unwashed hands. Consider social distancing measures, such as reducing out of school activities and avoiding events where they will be in contact with a large number of people. Most importantly, the disease is generally mild in children, but could cause problems in children if their lung condition is not under good control. Make sure they are taking all of their regular medications, such as preventor inhalers for asthma, to reduce their risk of complications if they do get the infection.

 
I HAVE CHILDREN AND I HAVE A LUNG CONDITION, WHAT SHOULD I DO TO ENSURE THAT I AM STILL SAFE?
Both you and your children should practice good handwashing with soap and water for 20 seconds regularly through the day and particularly after your child has come home from school (if applicable) and before meals. Both you and your children should avoid contact with anyone who is sick or who has been in contact with people potentially infected with COVID-19.

I AM WORRIED ABOUT SHORTAGES OF VENTILATORS. WOULD YOU RECOMMEND ANY THAT I CAN USE AT HOME?
Ventilation should only be provided by a trained specialist and is not something that you should acquire yourself without specialist supervision.

I’VE HAD A LUNG TRANSPLANT. IS THERE ANY SPECIFIC ADVICE THAT APPLIES TO ME?
Your transplant team or specialist may already have a plan in place and if so you should follow their advice. In general, if you develop symptoms that would be consistent with a viral infection it would be advisable to self-isolate at home and contact your local transplant team for advice. If you are unwell with problems such as difficult breathing you should seek medical attention urgently, as would be the case at any other time.

IS THERE ANYTHING THAT I SHOULD NOT DO AS SOMEONE WITH CYSTIC FIBROSIS?
Please follow guidance from your healthcare professionals and the local response to COVID-19. We do not recommend self-isolation for all people with CF, but it may be appropriate to stay at home as much as possible.
Avoid places where there is likely to be an increased risk of exposure such as crowds - especially in poorly ventilated areas.
Currently there are no blanket recommendations about school attendance. This will depend on your local circumstances and individual advice from your local CF centre.
If you are employed, we recommend contacting your employer to consider what reasonable adjustments can be made to your working conditions to help protect you. Your local CF centre may be able to provide advice and support for this.

I HAVE HAD CANCER AND WAS TREATED WITH CHEMOTHERAPY AND RADIATION; THIS WAS SOME TIME AGO BUT AM I STILL AT A HIGHER RISK OF COVID-19?
It is difficult to comment on a specific case. The vast majority of people, even if they acquired COVID-19 and even if they have underlying conditions will have a mild illness similar to a cold or the flu. Severe heart disease and lung disease have been associated with worse outcomes, particularly in patients that are over the age of 80 years. Cancer, when successfully treated, is not usually a risk factor for worse outcomes in respiratory infections like COVID-19.

IS THERE ANYTHING SPECIFIC I SHOULD KNOW ABOUT COVID-19 AND MY CONDITION?
People with bronchiectasis might be at higher risk of complications if they get the COVID-19, so here are a few suggestions to reduce your risk of getting the infection and the risk of complications if you do: Avoid contact with anyone who is sick. Ask sick friends or relatives not to visit you and keep distance of at least 2 metres from anyone sick that you encounter in public.
Do not touch your mouth, nose or eyes with unwashed hands unless unavoidable.
Wash your hands thoroughly after touching surfaces that may be contaminated. Wash your hands with warm water and soap for 20 seconds. Make sure you take all of your regular medications and keep up with your usual treatments to keep your lungs as healthy as possible. Specifically for bronchiectasis, ensure you do your airway clearance exercises regularly- this clears mucus from the lungs and reduces the risk of a flare-up (exacerbation).
If you develop a fever and cough, but feel well, try to increase the frequency of your airway clearance and take paracetamol to reduce fever. If you become more unwell, seek medical advice. If you have a home supply of antibiotics, as many patients with bronchiectasis do, only take this if your sputum (phlegm) increases in amount or becomes discoloured. Antibiotics will not work against a virus, but would treat a bacterial infection.
 
WHAT ABOUT PATIENTS WITH TB ON ANTI-TB TREATMENT IF THEY GET INFECTED WITH COVID-19? IS THERE ANY GUIDANCE OF RECOMMENDATION FOR TREATMENT?
It is important to continue with your TB treatment even if you start to feel unwell. Keep taking your medications unless advised by a healthcare professional. TB should not have any effect on the severity of COVID-19 infection. Treatment of COVID-19 infection might be more complicated due to interaction between TB medications and other medications, so it is important you speak to a pharmacist or doctor before taking medication.

ARE PATIENTS WHO ARE USING ANTI-IL5 TREATMENTS OR SIMILAR, THAT REDUCE EOSINOPHILS, AT HIGHER RISK?  SHOULD THEY STOP OR MODIFY DOSAGES? 
Do not stop or modify any of your asthma medications because of concern about COVID-19. There is a risk that doing that could make your asthma control worse, causing you to need medical treatment or hospital admission. Anti-IL-5 should have no effect on the risk of getting COVID-19, and keeping taking it could theoretically reduce the risk of an asthma attack if you were to contract the virus.

I CURRENTLY HAVE FLU, SHOULD I BE MORE WORRIED?
If you have a confirmed influenza (flu) infection, then no, you don’t need to be more worried. Getting one virus does not make you more likely to get another infection.

I HAVE PLEURAL THICKENING, DOES THIS PUT ME AT A HIGHER RISK IF I CATCH COVID-19?
No, pleural thickening would not affect the risk of catching COVID-19 and would not increase the risk of complications unless it is combined with other heart or lung conditions.

I AM GENERALLY HEALTHY, BUT HAVE HAD PNEUMONIA SEVERAL TIMES DOES THIS MEAN THAT I WILL BE AFFECTED MORE SEVERELY?
No, previous infections do not increase the risk of more severe infections in future unless the previous infections were due to other diseases (such as severe heart or lung conditions, diabetes or conditions or drugs that suppress the immune system).

I HAVE HAD PART OF MY LUNG REMOVED – HOW WILL COVID-19 AFFECT ME?
If you are otherwise healthy, there is no reason to think that this would make COVID-19 infection more severe or more likely. Ensure you have enough supplies in the house for a few weeks, in case you become unwell or need to self-isolate. This includes food, medications and household items. Keep away from others who are sick, both when inside and outside, and ask anyone who has symptoms not to visit. Avoid crowds or large gatherings. Avoid cruise travel and non-essential air travel.
Practice regular hand hygiene by washing with hot water and soap for 20 seconds at a time. Do not touch your mouth, nose and eyes with unwashed hands. Keep up with your regular treatments. If COVID-19 levels are high in your locality, stay at home as much as possible.

What is a coronavirus?
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses which may cause illness in animals or humans.  In humans, several coronaviruses are known to cause respiratory infections ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS). The most recently discovered coronavirus causes coronavirus disease COVID-19.

What is COVID-19?
COVID-19 is the infectious disease caused by the most recently discovered coronavirus. This new virus and disease were unknown before the outbreak began in Wuhan, China, in December 2019.

What are the symptoms of COVID-19?
The most common symptoms of COVID-19 are fever, tiredness, and dry cough. Some patients may have aches and pains, nasal congestion, runny nose, sore throat or diarrhea. These symptoms are usually mild and begin gradually. Some people become infected but don’t develop any symptoms and don't feel unwell. Most people (about 80%) recover from the disease without needing special treatment. Around 1 out of every 6 people who gets COVID-19 becomes seriously ill and develops difficulty breathing. Older people, and those with underlying medical problems like high blood pressure, heart problems or diabetes, are more likely to develop serious illness. People with fever, cough and difficulty breathing should seek medical attention.

How does COVID-19 spread?
People can catch COVID-19 from others who have the virus. The disease can spread from person to person through small droplets from the nose or mouth which are spread when a person with COVID-19 coughs or exhales. These droplets land on objects and surfaces around the person. Other people then catch COVID-19 by touching these objects or surfaces, then touching their eyes, nose or mouth. People can also catch COVID-19 if they breathe in droplets from a person with COVID-19 who coughs out or exhales droplets. This is why it is important to stay more than 1 meter (3 feet) away from a person who is sick.WHO is assessing ongoing research on the ways COVID-19 is spread and will continue to share updated findings. 

Can the virus that causes COVID-19 be transmitted through the air?
Studies to date suggest that the virus that causes COVID-19 is mainly transmitted through contact with respiratory droplets rather than through the air.  See previous answer on “How does COVID-19 spread?”

Can CoVID-19 be caught from a person who has no symptoms?
The main way the disease spreads is through respiratory droplets expelled by someone who is coughing. The risk of catching COVID-19 from someone with no symptoms at all is very low. However, many people with COVID-19 experience only mild symptoms. This is particularly true at the early stages of the disease. It is therefore possible to catch COVID-19 from someone who has, for example, just a mild cough and does not feel ill.  WHO is assessing ongoing research on the period of transmission of COVID-19 and will continue to share updated findings.    

Can I catch COVID-19 from the feces of someone with the disease?
The risk of catching COVID-19 from the feces of an infected person appears to be low. While initial investigations suggest the virus may be present in feces in some cases, spread through this route is not a main feature of the outbreak. WHO is assessing ongoing research on the ways COVID-19 is spread and will continue to share new findings. Because this is a risk, however, it is another reason to clean hands regularly, after using the bathroom and before eating. 

What can I do to protect myself and prevent the spread of disease?
Protection measures for everyone Stay aware of the latest information on the COVID-19 outbreak, available on the WHO website and through your national and local public health authority. Many countries around the world have seen cases of COVID-19 and several have seen outbreaks. Authorities in China and some other countries have succeeded in slowing or stopping their outbreaks. However, the situation is unpredictable so check regularly for the latest news. You can reduce your chances of being infected or spreading COVID-19 by taking some simple precautions: Regularly and thoroughly clean your hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or wash them with soap and water. Why? Washing your hands with soap and water or using alcohol-based hand rub kills viruses that may be on your hands. Maintain at least 1 metre (3 feet) distance between yourself and anyone who is coughing or sneezing.

How likely am I to catch COVID-19?
The risk depends on where you  are - and more specifically, whether there is a COVID-19 outbreak unfolding there. For most people in most locations the risk of catching COVID-19 is still low. However, there are now places around the world (cities or areas) where the disease is spreading. For people living in, or visiting, these areas the risk of catching COVID-19 is higher. Governments and health authorities are taking vigorous action every time a new case of COVID-19 is identified. Be sure to comply with any local restrictions on travel, movement or large gatherings. Cooperating with disease control efforts will reduce your risk of catching or spreading COVID-19.COVID-19 outbreaks can be contained and transmission stopped, as has been shown in China and some other countries. Unfortunately, new outbreaks can emerge rapidly. It’s important to be aware of the situation where you are or intend to go. WHO publishes daily updates on the COVID-19 situation worldwide.You can see these at https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports/

Should I worry about COVID-19?
Illness due to COVID-19 infection is generally mild, especially for children and young adults. However, it can cause serious illness: about 1 in every 5 people who catch it need hospital care. It is therefore quite normal for people to worry about how the COVID-19 outbreak will affect them and their loved ones.We can channel our concerns into actions to protect ourselves, our loved ones and our communities. First and foremost among these actions is regular and thorough hand-washing and good respiratory hygiene. Secondly, keep informed and follow the advice of the local health authorities including any restrictions put in place on travel, movement and gatherings. Learn more about how to protect yourself at https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public

Who is at risk of developing severe illness?
While we are still learning about how COVID-2019 affects people, older persons and persons with pre-existing medical conditions (such as high blood pressure, heart disease, lung disease, cancer or diabetes)  appear to develop serious illness more often than others.

Are antibiotics effective in preventing or treating the COVID-19?
No. Antibiotics do not work against viruses, they only work on bacterial infections. COVID-19 is caused by a virus, so antibiotics do not work. Antibiotics should not be used as a means of prevention or treatment of COVID-19. They should only be used as directed by a physician to treat a bacterial infection.

Are there any medicines or therapies that can prevent or cure COVID-19?
While some western, traditional or home remedies may provide comfort and alleviate symptoms of COVID-19, there is no evidence that current medicine can prevent or cure the disease. WHO does not recommend self-medication with any medicines, including antibiotics, as a prevention or cure for COVID-19. However, there are several ongoing clinical trials that include both western and traditional medicines. WHO will continue to provide updated information as soon as clinical findings are available.

Is there a vaccine, drug or treatment for COVID-19?
Not yet. To date, there is no vaccine and no specific antiviral medicine to prevent or treat COVID-2019. However, those affected should receive care to relieve symptoms. People with serious illness should be hospitalized. Most patients recover thanks to supportive care.Possible vaccines and some specific drug treatments are under investigation. They are being tested through clinical trials. WHO is coordinating efforts to develop vaccines and medicines to prevent and treat COVID-19. The most effective ways to protect yourself and others against COVID-19 are to frequently clean your hands, cover your cough with the bend of elbow or tissue, and maintain a distance of at least 1 meter (3 feet) from people who are coughing or sneezing. (See Basic protective measures against the new coronavirus).

Is COVID-19 the same as SARS?
No. The virus that causes COVID-19 and the one that caused the outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in 2003 are related to each other genetically, but the diseases they cause are quite different.SARS was more deadly but much less infectious than COVID-19. There have been no outbreaks of SARS anywhere in the world since 2003.

Should I wear a mask to protect myself?
Only wear a mask if you are ill with COVID-19 symptoms (especially coughing) or looking after someone who may have COVID-19. Disposable face mask can only be used once. If you are not ill or looking after someone who is ill then you are wasting a mask. There is a world-wide shortage of masks, so WHO urges people to use masks wisely.WHO advises rational use of medical masks to avoid unnecessary wastage of precious resources and mis-use of masks  (see Advice on the use of masks).The most effective ways to protect yourself and others against COVID-19 are to frequently clean your hands, cover your cough with the bend of elbow or tissue and maintain a distance of at least 1 meter (3 feet) from people who are coughing or sneezing. See basic protective measures against the new coronavirus for more information.

How long is the incubation period for COVID-19?
The “incubation period” means the time between catching the virus and beginning to have symptoms of the disease. Most estimates of the incubation period for COVID-19 range from 1-14 days, most commonly around five days. These estimates will be updated as more data become available.

Can humans become infected with the COVID-19 from an animal source?
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in animals. Occasionally, people get infected with these viruses which may then spread to other people. For example, SARS-CoV was associated with civet cats and MERS-CoV is transmitted by dromedary camels. Possible animal sources of COVID-19 have not yet been confirmed. To protect yourself, such as when visiting live animal markets, avoid direct contact with animals and surfaces in contact with animals. Ensure good food safety practices at all times. Handle raw meat, milk or animal organs with care to avoid contamination of uncooked foods and avoid consuming raw or undercooked animal products.

Can I catch COVID-19 from my pet?
While there has been one instance of a dog being infected in Hong Kong, to date, there is no evidence that a dog, cat or any pet can transmit COVID-19. COVID-19 is mainly spread through droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or speaks. To protect yourself, clean your hands frequently and thoroughly.WHO continues to monitor the latest research on this and other COVID-19 topics and will update as new findings are available.

How long does the virus survive on surfaces?
It is not certain how long the virus that causes COVID-19 survives on surfaces, but it seems to behave like other coronaviruses. Studies suggest that coronaviruses (including preliminary information on the COVID-19 virus) may persist on surfaces for a few hours or up to several days. This may vary under different conditions (e.g. type of surface, temperature or humidity of the environment).If you think a surface may be infected, clean it with simple disinfectant to kill the virus and protect yourself and others. Clean your hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or wash them with soap and water. Avoid touching your eyes, mouth, or nose.

Is it safe to receive a package from any area where COVID-19 has been reported?
Yes. The likelihood of an infected person contaminating commercial goods is low and the risk of catching the virus that causes COVID-19 from a package that has been moved, travelled, and exposed to different conditions and temperature is also low.